Adjusted for the RScheme 0.7.3 module system -- 1999.12.12
Ported to RScheme 0.7.1 module system by Donovan Kolbly -- 1997.10.17
from version found on scheme repository (www.cs.indiana.edu/scheme-repository)
.....................................................................
Copyright 1992 William Clinger

Permission to copy this software, in whole or in part, to use this
software for any lawful purpose, and to redistribute this software
is granted subject to the restriction that all copies made of this
software must include this copyright notice in full.

I also request that you send me a copy of any improvements that you
make to this software so that they may be incorporated within it to
the benefit of the Scheme community.

This directory contains a prototype implementation of the R4RS
high-level macro system [1] using the algorithm of [2].  Several
extensions have been added to address problems identified in [3]
and to allow QUASIQUOTE to be written as a high-level macro.  The
low-level system of [1] is not implemented, but a low-level system
along the lines of [4] could easily be added.  The code is written
in IEEE/ANSI Scheme and has been tested in MacScheme, Gambit, and
Chez Scheme.

This directory contains the following files:
 
    README               this file
    expand.sch           the kernel of the macro expander
    misc.sch             miscellaneous procedures
    prefs.sch            implementation-dependent parameters
    syntaxenv.sch        an implementation of syntactic environments
    syntaxrules.sch      a compiler for SYNTAX-RULES
    tests.sch            a tiny test suite
    usual.sch            macros for Scheme's derived expressions

The system can be loaded in the following order:

    (begin
     (load "expand.sch")
     (load "misc.sch")
     (load "prefs.sch")
     (load "syntaxenv.sch")
     (load "syntaxrules.sch")
     (load "usual.sch"))

There are two external entry points, MACRO-EXPAND and
DEFINE-SYNTAX-SCOPE.  MACRO-EXPAND is a procedure of one
argument that takes a Scheme expression or definition,
represented as a list, symbol, or self-evaluating constant
in the traditional way, and returns a fully macro-expanded
form of that expression or definition.  Top-level DEFINE and
DEFINE-SYNTAX forms encountered by MACRO-EXPAND have the side
effect of updating the global syntactic environment.  The form
of the macro-expanded code is determined by the parameters
in "prefs.sch" and by the procedures in "expand.sch".

DEFINE-SYNTAX-SCOPE, which is described below, determines the
scope of syntactic keywords bound by DEFINE-SYNTAX.


SCOPE RULES.

It is considered good practice to organize programs so that all
syntactic definitions occur at the beginning of a program,
ordered so that no syntactic definition contains any references
to syntactic keywords defined by subsequent syntactic definitions.
If this practice is followed, and no syntactic keyword (including
the standard keywords such as LAMBDA) is redefined, then the
meaning of the program will not depend on the subtly detailed
scope rules described below.

The R4RS is deliberately vague about the scope of variables
introduced by top-level DEFINE, and the description of the
high-level macro system in the R4RS is even more deliberately
vague about the scope of syntactic keywords introduced by
DEFINE-SYNTAX.  It is left to each implementation to specify
the details, in part to encourage experimentation with different
scope rules.  The scope rules described below are the rules for
this implementation, but they should not be construed as an
authoritative interpretation of the R4RS on this subject.

The region of a syntactic keyword defined using DEFINE-SYNTAX
includes any expression or definition that follows the definition
of the syntactic keyword, and does not include any expression or
definition that precedes the definition of the syntactic keyword.
This rule does not specify the region of a syntactic keyword with
respect to syntactic definitions.  There are three plausible scope
rules for syntactic keywords bound by DEFINE-SYNTAX.  I call these
rules the LETREC, LETREC*, and LET* rules:

  LETREC   The region includes all syntax definitions.

  LETREC*  The region includes the syntactic definition in which
           the syntactic keyword is bound, together with all
           subsequent syntactic definitions.

  LET*     The region includes all subsequent syntactic definitions,
           but does not include the syntactic definition in which
           the syntactic keyword is bound.

The LET* rule is incompatible with some of the R4RS examples
but can be extremely useful nonetheless, as suggested by some
examples in "tests.sch".  The LETREC and LETREC* rules both
appear to be completely compatible with the R4RS.  The
advantages and disadvantages of these three scope rules are:

  LETREC   Advantages:
             Supports mutually recursive global macros.  Corresponds
             to the scope rule for variables bound by top-level
             DEFINE in most implementations.
           Disadvantages:
             Cannot capture the current meaning of a syntactic
             keyword that is later extended or redefined using
             DEFINE-SYNTAX.  Does not correspond to the scope
             rule for syntactic keywords with respect to expressions
             and definitions in this implementation.

  LETREC*  Advantages:
             Allows self-recursive global macros.  Allows the
             current meaning of a syntactic keyword to be captured.
             Corresponds to the scope rule for syntactic keywords
             with respect to expressions and definitions in this
             implementation.
           Disadvantages:
             Does not support mutually recursive global macros.
             Does not correspond to the scope rule for variables
             bound by top-level DEFINE in most implementations.

  LET*     Advantages:
             Allows the current meaning of a syntactic keyword
             to be captured and used to define an extended meaning.
             Like the LETREC* rule, it corresponds to the scope
             rule for syntactic keywords with respect to expressions
             and definitions in this implementation.
           Disadvantages:
             Does not support recursive global macros.  Several
             examples given in the R4RS would not work with this
             scope rule.  Does not correspond to the scope rule
             for variables bound by top-level DEFINE.

This implementation contains two extensions designed to encourage
experimentation with these three scope rules.

DEFINE-SYNTAX-SCOPE is a procedure that determines which of
these three scope rules is the default for syntactic keywords
defined by DEFINE-SYNTAX.  With no arguments, DEFINE-SYNTAX-SCOPE
indicates the current default by returning one of the symbols
LETREC, LETREC*, or LET*.  Given one of those three symbols as
an argument, DEFINE-SYNTAX-SCOPE changes the default scope rule.
The default scope rule is set to LETREC by "usual.sch".

The second extension allows syntactic definitions of the form

    (DEFINE-SYNTAX <keyword> <scope> <transformer spec>)

where <scope> is one of the identifiers LETREC, LETREC*, or LET*.

The scope rule used to interpret a syntactic definition in this
implementation does not affect the scope of the syntactic keyword
bound by that syntactic definition.  Instead it determines the
scope rule used to resolve references to syntactic keywords that
occur within the <transformer spec>.  Although this sounds weird,
it seems to offer the most useful semantics.


MACROS THAT DEFINE MACROS.

This implementation contains an extension to ease the construction
of macros that define other macros.  If a <template> of the form

    (::: <template>)

occurs as a subtemplate on the right side of a <syntax rule>, then
all ellipses that occur within the <template>, and all occurrences
of the ::: symbol itself, will be transcribed as if they were
ordinary identifiers.  This allows a macro to expand into expressions
that contain ellipses, or ellipses escaped by the ::: symbol.  See
"tests.sch" for examples.

Pattern variables that occur within a template escaped by ::: will
still be expanded, which is occasionally useful, but it means that
the pattern variables of macros defined by a macro-defining macro
must be distinct from the pattern variables of the macro-defining
macro.  I have found this to be a common source of bugs in the
macro-defining macros I have written.


VECTORS AS PATTERNS.

The R4RS macro system does not allow vectors as patterns.  Vector
patterns are needed to write QUASIQUOTE as a high-level macro,
however, so this implementation adds the following productions
to the syntax of R4RS:

    <pattern>   -->  #(<pattern>*)
                  |  #(<pattern>* <pattern> <ellipsis>)
    <template>  -->  #(<template element>*)

Vectors cannot be used as a <pattern datum> or <template datum>,
which is incompatible with the R4RS.



REFERENCES.

[1]  William Clinger and Jonathan Rees [editors], "The Revised^4
Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme", Lisp Pointers Volume IV,
Number 3, July-September 1991, pages 1-55.

[2]  William Clinger and Jonathan Rees, "Macros That Work",
1991 ACM Conference on Principles of Programming Languages, pages
155-162.

[3]  William Clinger, "Macros in Scheme", Lisp Pointers Volume IV,
Number 4, October-December 1991, pages 17-23.

[4]  William Clinger, "Hygienic Macros Through Explicit Renaming",
Lisp Pointers Volume IV, Number 4, October-December 1991, pages
17-23.

[5]  Marianne Baudinet and David MacQueen, "Tree Pattern Matching
for ML", available from David MacQueen, AT&T Bell Laboratories,
600 Mountain Avenue, Murray Hill NJ 07974, 1985.

Corrections to [2]:

  *  The algorithm is O(n), where n is the time required by
     naive macro expansion as in C.  Naive macro expansion
     as in Common Lisp can be arbitrarily faster than naive
     macro expansion in C, because a Common Lisp macro can
     insert an arbitrarily large quoted constant in constant
     time, and the macro expander does not have to traverse
     that constant later.  Our algorithm can insert a large
     quoted constant in constant time only if it contains no
     symbols, and the macro expander must later traverse the
     constant to see whether it contains identifiers that
     must be reverted to symbols.  This means that, on
     contrived examples, naive macro expansion as in Common
     Lisp can be arbitrarily faster than the algorithm of our
     POPL paper.  So far as I can tell, this fact has no
     practical significance.

  *  In our paper I claimed that the ability to compile rules
     at macro definition time had no effect on the asymptotic
     time required by our algorithm.  This is not true.  One
     can contrive examples to show that compilation of rules
     at macro definition time is necessary to achieve O(n)
     performance.


KNOWN BUGS.

  *  MACRO-EXPAND is not robust when given a syntactically
     incorrect argument.  Circular lists in particular will
     cause trouble.  So will syntactically incorrect macro
     definitions.

  *  The macro system does not complain if it encounters an
     unquoted vector, empty list, procedure, et cetera, but
     instead passes such things through in the macro-expanded
     code.  Some will consider this a feature, not a bug.

  *  This implementation is not O(n) because the operations on
     syntactic environments do not run in constant time.  In
     many implementations of Scheme, constant-time operations
     can be obtained by using property lists and the technique
     of shallow binding.

  *  The compiler for SYNTAX-RULES fails to detect and exploit
     subtemplates that contain no pattern variables and no
     inserted identifiers.  On contrived examples this can
     affect the asymptotic complexity of the implementation.
     See the above corrections to the 1991 POPL paper.

  *  Quoted data are fully copied.  They can and should be
     copied to the least possible extent.

  *  This implementation seems to be roughly twice as slow as the
     implementation of naive macro expansion in MacScheme.  There
     are many things that could be tuned to make it faster, while
     remaining within the bounds of IEEE/ANSI Scheme.  One is to
     use some data type other than symbols to represent
     identifiers, since the string and symbol manipulation
     operations required to create a new symbol are usually slow.
     Another is to compile rule patterns as is done in Standard
     ML of New Jersey [5].


KNOWN FEATURES:

  *  Top-level DEFINE and DEFINE-SYNTAX have the side effect
     of replacing the top-level denotation of the identifier
     being defined.  A warning is issued if the top-level
     denotation being replaced is that of a syntactic keyword.

  *  Expressions are permitted following a sequence of top-level
     definitions or syntax definitions.  Top-level definitions
     may not be mixed with syntax definitions within a single
     form.

  *  All three plausible scope rules for syntactic keywords
     (LETREC, LETREC*, and LET*) are available as described above.
     Each can be implemented efficiently by itself, but it's a bit
     of a pain to support all three efficiently in a single
     implementation.  Currently the LETREC* and LET* scope rules
     are implemented much less efficiently than the LETREC rule.

  *  The ::: symbol can be used as an escape to allow the ellipsis
     symbol to be inserted by the right hand side of a syntax
     rule.

  *  This implementation allows vectors as patterns and templates.

William Clinger
9 April 1993
revised 13 April 1993
  (fixed bugs in M-MATCH, named LET; improved CASE)
